README.md, before:

# Tricycle
> It don't go fast but it do be goin'

Ever wanted to learn how a deep learning framework *actually* works under the hood? Tricycle might be for you.

## Overview
Tricycle is a minimal framework for deep learning. The goal of this library is
not to match the speed or complexity or Pytorch or Tensorflow, but instead to get a good understanding of how
deep learning actually works at every level: from automatic differentiation all the way up to modern Transformers. It is built using nothing but standard
Python and Numpy which means that everything be understandable to anyone who knows a bit of Python.

Here are some things you can do with Tricycle:
- Create tensors
- Perform operations (addition, exponentiation, cosine, ...) on tensors
- Automatic differentiation of tensors
- Manipulate tensors with [einstein notation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Einstein_notation)
- Successfully train deep learning models
- Train a Transformer (!)

Here are some things you can't do with Tricycle (yet):
- Do anything at the speed of pytorch
- Use a GPU

If you want to do these things, you should check out [pytorch](https://pytorch.org/)

If you would like to learn more about the process of building tricycle, you can check out my [blog](http://bclarkson-code.com)

## Usage
Theoretically, as a fully functional deep learning library, you can build any modern Deep Learning model with Tricycle. For example, this is how you can train a (very) small language model on the shakespeare dataset:

```python
import pickle

from tqdm import tqdm

from tricycle.configs import SmolGPTConfig
from tricycle.dataset import CausalLMDataset
from tricycle.loss import cross_entropy
from tricycle.models import GPT
from tricycle.optimisers import StochasticGradientDescent
from tricycle_datasets.shakespeare import Shakespeare

config = SmolGPTConfig()
model = GPT(config)

tokens = Shakespeare(vocab_size=config.vocab_size)
dataset = (
    CausalLMDataset(
        tokens=tokens,
        vocab_size=config.vocab_size,
        batch_size=config.batch_size,
        context_window=config.context_window,
    )
    .batch()
    .to_tensor()
    .to_vector()
)
loss_fn = cross_entropy
optimiser = StochasticGradientDescent(
    learning_rate=config.learning_rate,
    weight_decay=config.weight_decay,
    momentum=config.momentum,
)

for inputs, outputs in tqdm(dataset):
    logits = model(inputs)
    loss = loss_fn(outputs, logits).from_vector().mean().mean()
    loss.backward()
    model.update(optimiser)

    # clean up the computational graph
    loss.cleanup()

# save results
with open("model.pkl", "wb") as f:
    pickle.dump(model, f)
```

This will fetch the complete works of shakespeare, build it into a dataset, tokenise it, and train a simple GPT on it.

As you can see, it looks pretty similar to other frameworks like PyTorch. However, because Tricycle is much smaller and simpler, if you want to figure out how something works, you can dive into the code and get an answer in a few minutes instead of hours.

## Installation
Tricycle uses [poetry](https://python-poetry.org/) to manage dependencies. Assuming it is installed, you
can install Tricycle by running:
```bash
poetry install
```

## Tests
Tricycle is tested using [pytest](https://docs.pytest.org/en/latest/)
```bash
poetry run pytest
```

## Contact
Want to learn more / have a chat / work together?
You can send an email to: [bclarkson-code@proton.me](mailto:bclarkson-code@proton.me)

Commit message:

5 gpu support (#34)
* Added property based test for tensor addition

* Added hypothesis to gitignore

* added hypothesis

* Fixed bug in addition logic

* Refactored backward operations for einsum

* Added nan handling to close_to

* Added new tests for more of the tensor API

* Handled extra edge cases

* Added backend folder

* Started decouppling backend

* Fixed some tests that broke during decouple

* Tests now pass after decoupling backend

* Added GPU support

* Updated Readme

Updated Readme

* Updated github actions

* pre-commit checks

* added cupy to environ,ment file

* moved hyupothesis to test dependencies

* Updated saved model name

* Update main.yml (#35)

* Update main.yml

* Update main.yml

* fixed pipeline

* Added env activation

* Added shell usage to yaml stages

* Updated config for smolgpt

* Fixed pre-commit

* Added conditions to handle no GPU available

* ran pre-commit

* Fixed gh actions

* Update main.yml

* Checked that we can actually use cupy

* Fixed missing edge case in cupy enabling

* Improved cupy enabling error message

---------

Co-authored-by: Clarkson, Benedict <benedict.clarkson@sky.uk>

README.md, after:

# Tricycle
> It don't go fast but it do be goin'

Ever wanted to learn how a deep learning framework *actually* works under the hood? Tricycle might be for you.

## Overview
Tricycle is a minimal framework for deep learning. The goal of this library is
not to match the speed or complexity or Pytorch or Tensorflow, but instead to get a good understanding of how
deep learning actually works at every level: from automatic differentiation all the way up to modern Transformers. It is built using nothing but standard
Python and Numpy which means that everything be understandable to anyone who knows a bit of Python.

Here are some things you can do with Tricycle:
- Create tensors
- Perform operations (addition, exponentiation, cosine, ...) on tensors
- Automatic differentiation of tensors
- Manipulate tensors with [einstein notation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Einstein_notation)
- Successfully train deep learning models
- Use a GPU
- Train a Transformer (!)

Here are some things you can't do with Tricycle (yet):
- Do anything at the speed of pytorch

If you want to do these things, you should check out [pytorch](https://pytorch.org/)

If you would like to learn more about the process of building tricycle, you can check out my [blog](http://bclarkson-code.com)

## Usage
Theoretically, as a fully functional deep learning library, you can build any modern Deep Learning model with Tricycle. For example, this is how you can train a (very) small language model on the shakespeare dataset:

```python
import pickle

from tqdm import tqdm

from tricycle.configs import SmolGPTConfig
from tricycle.dataset import CausalLMDataset
from tricycle.loss import cross_entropy
from tricycle.models import GPT
from tricycle.optimisers import StochasticGradientDescent
from tricycle_datasets.shakespeare import Shakespeare

config = SmolGPTConfig()
model = GPT(config)

tokens = Shakespeare(vocab_size=config.vocab_size)
dataset = (
    CausalLMDataset(
        tokens=tokens,
        vocab_size=config.vocab_size,
        batch_size=config.batch_size,
        context_window=config.context_window,
    )
    .batch()
    .to_tensor()
    .to_vector()
)
loss_fn = cross_entropy
optimiser = StochasticGradientDescent(
    learning_rate=config.learning_rate,
    weight_decay=config.weight_decay,
    momentum=config.momentum,
)

model.to_gpu()

for inputs, outputs in tqdm(dataset):
    inputs = inputs.to_gpu()
    outputs = outputs.to_gpu()

    logits = model(inputs)
    loss = loss_fn(outputs, logits).from_vector().mean().mean()
    loss.backward()
    model.update(optimiser)

    # clean up the computational graph
    loss.cleanup()

# save results
with open("model.pkl", "wb") as f:
    pickle.dump(model, f)
```

This will fetch the complete works of shakespeare, build it into a dataset, tokenise it, and train a simple GPT on it.

As you can see, it looks pretty similar to other frameworks like PyTorch. However, because Tricycle is much smaller and simpler, if you want to figure out how something works, you can dive into the code and get an answer in a few minutes instead of hours.

## Installation
Tricycle uses [poetry](https://python-poetry.org/) to manage dependencies. Assuming it is installed, you
can install Tricycle by running:
```bash
poetry install
```

## Tests
Tricycle is tested using [pytest](https://docs.pytest.org/en/latest/)
```bash
poetry run pytest
```

## Contact
Want to learn more / have a chat / work together?
You can send an email to: [bclarkson-code@proton.me](mailto:bclarkson-code@proton.me)
